Participant
The expert meditator (TB; 56 years old) is a former physician and now a qualified teacher in the Tibetan Buddhist Karma Kagyü tradition. TB has been meditating for 40 years, lived as an ordained monk in a retreat center for 21 years, and was a teacher there for 17 years. He meditated for up to 12 h a day for 10 years and has spent an estimated total of over 50,000 h in formal meditative practice. TB’s exceptional introspective skills have already helped us to elucidate the experiential nature of other neurophysiological signals (Schmidt et al., 2016).
Procedure
Recording took place in the Department of Radiology at the University Medical Center in Freiburg, Germany. The recording was divided into five scanning runs during which the participant was instructed to keep his eyes closed. A 5-min baseline measure was first performed during which TB was instructed to remain relaxed and alert without engaging in any formal meditation practice. During the runs 2, 3, and 4 (each 3 min in length) TB was asked to focus on external sensory perceptions (i.e., the sound of the scanner), internal mentation (i.e., an episodic memory exercise) and bodily sensations, respectively. Finally, TB was instructed to engage in formal meditation to reach a state of content-minimized awareness (30 min). Between each run TB provided self-ratings regarding mentation, the outer senses, bodily self-awareness, and the experience of space and time during the previous condition using a visual 10-step rating scale controlled by a touchpad. TB was interviewed in detail about his experience after completion of the recording.
Data Acquisition
Neurophysiologic data was acquired by simultaneous EEG and fMRI recordings. The EEG was recorded using a MR-compatible, high-resolution, 256-channel surface EEG system (Geodesic EEG System 410, Electrical Geodesics, Eugene, OR, United States) with a bandpass filter between 0.1 and 400 Hz and a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. The fMRI was acquired on a Siemens 3T Prisma scanner (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) using the following parameters: magnetic resonance encephalography (MREG) sequence (Assländer et al., 2013), TR = 100 ms, TE = 36 ms, flip angle 25°, 3D field of view 192 mm × 192 mm × 150 mm, and a spatial resolution of 3 mm × 3 mm × 3 mm. The ECG and respiration data were recorded using the physiological monitoring unit of the MR scanner.
Data Analysis
fMRI data were pre-processed using FSL (FMRIB’s Software Library2). Images were motion-corrected, transformed into standard MNI space and smoothed with a 6-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. To localize the DMN, the DAN and the PAC, the 5-min baseline segment was decomposed into 100 independent spatial components by probabilistic independent component analysis (ICA) as implemented in MELODIC Version 3.14, part of FSL (Beckmann and Smith, 2004). The 100 resulting spatial maps were visually inspected to identify the components corresponding to DMN and DAN (see Figure 1) as well as the left and right PAC. For each analyzed condition, the fMRI time series were segmented into 60-s, non-overlapping time windows. Functional connectivity within each time window was then computed as Fisher-transformed correlation coefficients between each pair of nodes belonging to the previously identified independent component maps.
FIGURE 1The maps of the two ICA components representing DMN and DAN that have been used in the functional connectivity analysis. The maps are shown in axial and sagittal views superimposed on a standard MNI152 T1 2 mm resolution brain template. The following areas are visible: DMN: posterior cingulate cortex (with the adjacent regions of the precuneus), left and right inferior parietal lobule and medial prefrontal cortex; DAN: left and right intraparietal sulcus, left and right frontal eye field.
EEG data were pre-processed and analyzed using in-house MATLAB scripts and Brain Vision Analyzer (Brain Products, Gilching, Germany). Gradient and pulse artifacts were corrected by previously described in-house approaches (LeVan et al., 2013, 2016). Bandpass (0.5 to 70 Hz) and notch filters (48–52 Hz) were applied to correct for potential line noise. The data were divided in 60-s segments, re-referenced to average, and segmented into 2-s epochs. For each 60-s segment, at least 25 artifact-free epochs were transformed into the frequency domain using the fast-Fourier-transform (FFT) and averaged. The absolute spectral power at each of the 60 electrodes of the extended 10–20 system was computed for the theta (4–8 Hz) and alpha (8–12 Hz) frequency bands.
ECG data were analyzed for heart rate (HR) and heart-rate variability (HRV) using Kubios HRV Standard Software 2.0 (Kuopio, Finland). Successive R-peaks (R–R intervals) in the ECG signal were extracted, artifact corrected, and detrended using the smoothness-priors approach. Based on these R–R intervals we computed the root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD), a time-domain indicator for the HRV reported to be largely independent of respiratory effects (Hill and Siebenbrock, 2009). Respiration data were used to trace the breathing rate (BR) and to calculate the estimated oxygen consumption (OCe) as tidal volume multiplied by BR.
Data Editing
Only the resting-state baseline and the meditation condition were evaluated in this single-case study. According to TB’s report (see below), we decided to consider the last 5 min of the meditation condition as representative of CFA. In contrast, we consider the first 25 min of the meditation condition as a content-related meditative state, which was not the focus of our analysis. We used the 5-min segment in the middle of these 25-min meditation epoch (i.e., min 11 to 15) as ‘content-related meditation’ (CRM) for additional analyses. The data of the complete 30-min meditation condition were only used to trace the time courses of the various measurements and to calculate the correlation between the time courses of fMRI connectivity and EEG spectral power.
Statistical Analyses
For all measures we analyzed the values in segments of 60 s in length for the 5-min baseline and for the 30-min meditation condition. To identify significant differences between all three conditions (CFA, CRM and rest) we applied a one-way ANOVA with contrasts.
Furthermore, we investigated a possible association between changes in fMRI connectivity and changes in the EEG spectral power. For this purpose, we correlated the connectivity time courses of those pairs of network nodes which showed significant connectivity differences for the contrast CFA vs. rest, with the time courses of EEG theta and alpha power.
To account for potentially independent EEG power changes in different regions we computed the spectral power at those electrodes, which showed the highest relative power differences between CFA and rest, namely F6, F7, and Pz for the theta band and FCz, P7, P8 for the alpha band. The correlations between fMRI connectivity and EEG alpha power were calculated and tested over the full 35 min of the baseline plus the meditation condition. The statistical threshold for all tests was set at p = 0.05. We applied FDR-correction in all analyses.
