--- Materials and Methods ---
We retrospectively analyzed data from all brain tumor patients who underwent both task-based fMRI language mapping and rs-fMRI at Brigham and Women’s Hospital between September 1
Demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients.
All the procedures of this study were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Partners Institutional Review Board. The study protocol was fully explained to the patients prior to the acquisition of fMRI, and then patients provided written informed consent for research use of their imaging and clinical data.
Prior to MRI scanning, the patients underwent standard MR screening and were instructed on how to perform the language tasks. Patients did not receive fMRI (and were excluded from this study) if they had any contraindications to MR scanning or failed to understand the task instructions.
Structural and functional MRI was performed on a 3.0 Tesla Siemens scanner (Siemens Trio, Verio, Skyra, and Prisma Systems, Munich, Germany; see details of scanners in
A high resolution T2 weighted image was also acquired for the clinical fMRI report. Structural MRI was performed for surgical planning as clinically indicated, including a high resolution T1 weighted anatomical image with contrast (gadolinium) administration (axial 1 mm slices). The structural images were used for spatial co-registration and normalization of the fMRI.
The fMRI language tasks consisted of SC and AG. The SC task alternates between a high-level control condition in which the patient is shown non-pronounceable letter strings, and an experimental condition in which coherent sentences missing a single word are shown and the patient is instructed to complete the sentence silently. Six cycles of the control followed by the SC conditions are presented for a total duration of 4 min. In the AG task, the patient is presented with a single word, and is instructed to silently think of an antonym to that word. This condition alternates with a control condition in which a crosshair is shown. Six cycles of the AG and control conditions are presented for a total duration of 5 min. The stimuli were presented using a visual and audio stimulation system (Nordic Neurolab, Bergen, Norway). During the rs-fMRI scan, participants were instructed to keep still with their eyes closed for a duration of 4 (6 patients), 5 (23 patients), or 7 min (18 patients).
Brain tumor mapping was performed to defend against the possibility of a confounding effect of sex on tumor location. In each patient, we defined a conservative brain tumor mask that included a prior resection cavity and surrounding edema, as determined by both high density and proximity to the tumor boundary in the T1-enhancement MRI. Brain tumor masks were semi-automatically drawn on the T1-enhancement MRI by a post-doctoral research fellow and reviewed by a clinical fellow using the Brainlab Surgery Platforms and Software
fMRI analysis was performed using FSL (FMRIB Software Library Version 6.00
Normalization of brain images into a standard space is necessary for comparison across individuals but challenging in the presence of extensive brain pathology related to a tumor. For example, it may be difficult to determine the boundary between gray matter and the surrounding cerebral spinal fluid filled spaces in highly progressive MBT. We employed an optimized brain extraction algorithm for brains with pathological structures which has shown better performance on brain tissue extraction than other available tools (
The first-level fMRI analysis was carried out using the general linear model (GLM) module of FSL. The resulting z-maps were non-parametrically thresholded using a cluster threshold of
For the second-level analysis (fixed-effects), a two-way ANCOVA (sex × language task) was performed using GLM and covariates of age, tumor volume, tumor location, handedness, and scanner type. The tumor location was coded according to the lobe (frontal, temporal, insula, parietal, occipital, frontotemporal, frontoparietal, frontoinsula, and temporoparietal). The continuous (age and tumor volume) and categorical (tumor location, handedness scores, and scanner type) covariates were mean-centered across all participants by subtracting the overall mean value from each covariate. The resulting z-maps were non-parametrically thresholded using a cluster threshold of
Language lateralization was assessed for each task and for the combination of tasks using a laterality index (LI) calculated based on the amplitude of activation in the left and right hemispheres in anatomically-defined language regions-of-interest (ROIs) (
Error: 'charmap' codec can't encode character '\u2265' in position 131: character maps to <undefined>
